PubSub Binding v1.0 (#587)
cloudevents/spec: pubsub-protocol-binding.md

value is made available as [UTF-8][rfc3629] encoded JSON text Pub/Sub message data.

## 3. Pub/Sub Message Mapping

With Pub/Sub, the content mode is chosen by the sender of the
event. Protocol usage patterns that might allow solicitation of events using a
particular content mode might be defined by an application, but are not defined
here.

The receiver of the event can distinguish between the two content modes by
inspecting the [Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`][content-type] of the
[Pub/Sub message][pubsub-message]. If the attribute is present and its value is prefixed 
with the CloudEvents media type `application/cloudevents`, indicating the use of a known
[event format](#14-event-formats), the receiver SHOULD use _structured_ mode,
otherwise it MUST default to _binary_ mode.

If a receiver finds a CloudEvents media type as per the above rule, but with an
event format that it cannot handle, for instance
`application/cloudevents+avro`, it MAY still treat the event as binary and
forward it to another party as-is.

### 3.1. Binary Content Mode

The _binary_ content mode accommodates any shape of event data, and allows for

> efficient transfer and without transcoding effort.

Reviewer: I think it's worth pointing out that the Binary Content Mode can only be used if the metadata attributes fit within the limits of Pub/Sub.

```
Attributes per message: 100
Attribute key size: 256 bytes
Attribute value size: 1024 bytes
```

The value size could potentially be an issue...

#### 3.1.1. Content-Type

For the _binary_ mode, the [Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`][content-type], if present, MUST 
be used as the CloudEvents `datacontenttype` attribute.

#### 3.1.2. Event Data Encoding

The [`data`](#22-data-attribute) byte-sequence MUST be used as the value of the Pub/Sub
message data payload.

#### 3.1.3. Metadata Attributes

All [CloudEvents][ce] attributes 
MUST be individually mapped to and from distinct Pub/Sub message attributes.

##### 3.1.3.1 Pub/Sub Attribute Names

Except for attributes

> [explicitly handled in this specification](#2-use-of-cloudevents-attributes),

Reviewer: I find this confusing - there are no attributes explicitly handled there, right? I don't know what I'm supposed to take away from this.

the naming convention for the Pub/Sub attribute mapping of well-known CloudEvents
attributes is that each attribute name MUST be prefixed with "ce-".

Examples:

    * `time` maps to `ce-time`
    * `id` maps to `ce-id`
    * `specversion` maps to `ce-specversion`

> Attribute names are case-insensitive.

Reviewer: Is this a good idea? Let's say that one day Pub/Sub will allow filtering on attributes (FINALLY 😉 ), are you sure it's going to be case-insensitive?

I'd vote for lower-casing.

##### 3.1.3.2 Pub/Sub Attribute Values

The value for each Pub/Sub attribute MUST be constructed from the respective
CloudEvents attribute type's [canonical string representation][ce-types].

#### 3.1.4 Examples

This example shows the _binary_ mode mapping of an event to a Pub/Sub Message:

```text
Publish /some-topic
--- Attributes ---
{
  "ce-specversion": "1.0",
  "ce-type": "com.example.someevent",
  "ce-time": "2020-03-10T03:56:24Z",
  "ce-id": "1234-1234-1234",
  "ce-source": "/mycontext/subcontext",
    .... further attributes ...
  "ce-datacontenttype": "application/json; charset=utf-8",
}
--- Data ---
{
    ... application data ...
}
```

### 3.2. Structured Content Mode

The _structured_ content mode keeps event metadata and data together in the
payload, allowing simple forwarding of the same event across multiple routing
hops, and across multiple transports.

#### 3.2.1. Content-Type

> The [Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`][content-type] MUST be set to the media type of

Reviewer: Is the casing intentionally?

I'd find `content-type` more consistent with the binary mode. `contentType` is more consistent with the other PubSub attributes (e.g. `messageId`).

> # Pub/Sub Protocol Binding for CloudEvents - Version 1.0

Reviewer 2: Same comment on name

Author: Done, thanks!

placed into the Pub/Sub message body section using an
[event format](#14-event-formats).

In the _binary_ content mode, the value of the event `data` attribute is placed
into the Pub/Sub payload data as-is, with the `datacontenttype`
attribute value declaring its media type; all other event attributes are mapped
to Pub/Sub attributes.

### 1.4. Event Formats

Event formats, used with the _structured_ content mode, define how an event is
expressed in a particular data format. All implementations of this
specification MUST support the [JSON event format][json-format], but MAY support
any additional, including proprietary, formats.

### 1.5. Security

This specification does not introduce any new security features for Pub/Sub, or
mandate specific existing features to be used.

## 2. Use of CloudEvents Attributes

This specification does not further define any of the [CloudEvents][ce] event
attributes.

This mapping is intentionally robust against changes, including the addition and
removal of event attributes, and also accommodates vendor extensions to the
event metadata.

### 2.1. datacontenttype Attribute

> The `datacontenttype` attribute is assumed to contain a [RFC2046][rfc2046]

Reviewer 3: "is assumed to" doesn't have a clear meaning. Can we replace that phrase and others with RFC2119 words?

- "is free to"
- "the assumption is"
- "the expectation is"

Author: Makes sense, other specs used this terminology, but let's make it clearer here..

An application is free to hold the information in any in-memory representation
of its choosing, but as the value is transposed into a Pub/Sub message as defined 
in this specification, the assumption is that the `data` attribute value is made
available as a sequence of bytes.

For instance, if the declared `datacontenttype` is
`application/json;charset=utf-8`, the expectation is that the `data` attribute
value is made available as [UTF-8][rfc3629] encoded JSON text Pub/Sub message data.

## 3. Pub/Sub Message Mapping

With Pub/Sub, the content mode is chosen by the sender of the
event. Protocol usage patterns that might allow solicitation of events using a
particular content mode might be defined by an application, but are not defined
here.

The receiver of the event can distinguish between the two content modes by
inspecting the [Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`][content-type] of the
[Pub/Sub message][pubsub-message]. If the attribute is present and its value is prefixed 
with the CloudEvents media type `application/cloudevents`, indicating the use of a known
[event format](#14-event-formats), the receiver uses _structured_ mode,

> otherwise it defaults to _binary_ mode.

Reviewer 3: "the receiver uses": Is this guidance to the implementor or a statement of fact? This should use RFC2119 words.

Author: rephrased to: `the receiver is expected to use _structured_ mode,
otherwise it SHOULD default to _binary_ mode.` WDYT?

If a receiver finds a CloudEvents media type as per the above rule, but with an
event format that it cannot handle, for instance
`application/cloudevents+avro`, it MAY still treat the event as binary and
forward it to another party as-is.

### 3.1. Binary Content Mode

The _binary_ content mode accommodates any shape of event data, and allows for
efficient transfer and without transcoding effort.

#### 3.1.1. Content-Type

For the _binary_ mode, the [Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`][content-type] of the 
[Pub/Sub message][pubsub-message] property, if present, MUST be mapped

> directly to the CloudEvents `datacontenttype` attribute.

Reviewer 3: > "The Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type` of the Pub/Sub message property

What is the message property? That term isn't defined or used anywhere else. I think this can just be "The Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`", dropping the last 5 words referring to the property.

> MUST be mapped directly to

What does it mean to be "mapped directly to"? Must the values be identical? Must they have a deterministic transformation between them? This should be clearer.

Author: removed...

I ended up putting MUST be used... we shouldn't be transforming it...

#### 3.1.2. Event Data Encoding

The [`data`](#22-data-attribute) byte-sequence MUST be used as the value of the Pub/Sub
message data payload.

#### 3.1.3. Metadata Attributes

All [CloudEvents][ce] attributes 
MUST be individually mapped to and from distinct Pub/Sub message attributes, with
exceptions noted below.

> CloudEvents extensions that define their own attributes MAY define a diverging

Reviewer 3: nit: "divergent". "Diverging" implies continuing change. Or just use "different" which is clearer and also apt.

Author: I think this was introduced at the time that extensions could be nested maps... So I ended up removing it... not entirely sure though. WDYT

Reviewer 3: Now that extensions must have untyped string attribute values only, I can't think of a case where such a mapping would be required. I think it's fine to remove it. We can add this section back later if needed.

Author: sounds good!

mapping to Pub/Sub attributes for those attributes, especially if specific attributes
need to align with Pub/Sub features or with other specifications that have explicit
Pub/Sub attribute bindings.

> An extension specification that defines a diverging mapping rule for Pub/Sub, and

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what the purpose of this requirement is. It seems like an unusual burden and one that will be hard to police. If this is the desired state of binding specifications, it should really be part of the general CloudEvents spec. I favor removing it.

Author: done, not sure if you meant to remove all of it. Just double check I didn't misunderstood

CloudEvents attribute type's [canonical string representation][ce-types].

#### 3.1.4 Examples

This example shows the _binary_ mode mapping of an event to a Pub/Sub Message:

```text
Publish /some-topic
--- Attributes ---
{
  "ce-specversion": "1.0",
  "ce-type": "com.example.someevent",
  "ce-time": "2020-03-10T03:56:24Z",
  "ce-id": "1234-1234-1234",
  "ce-source": "/mycontext/subcontext",
    .... further attributes ...
  "ce-datacontenttype": "application/json; charset=utf-8",
}
--- Data ---
{
    ... application data ...
}
```

### 3.2. Structured Content Mode

The _structured_ content mode keeps event metadata and data together in the
payload, allowing simple forwarding of the same event across multiple routing
hops, and across multiple transports.

#### 3.2.1. Content-Type

The [Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`][content-type] MUST be set to the media type of
an [event format](#14-event-formats).

Example for the [JSON format][json-format]:

```text
"Content-Type": "application/cloudevents+json; charset=UTF-8"
```

#### 3.2.2. Event Data Encoding

The chosen [event format](#14-event-formats) defines how all attributes,
including the `data` attribute, are represented.

> The event metadata and data is then rendered in accordance with the event format

Reviewer 3: nit: "are then rendered"

Author: done! thanks!

### 2.1. datacontenttype Attribute

> The assumption is that the `datacontenttype` attribute contains a [RFC2046][rfc2046]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `datacontenttype` attribute SHOULD contain a [RFC2046][rfc2046]
```

Author: Done! thanks!

compliant media-type expression.

### 2.2. data Attribute

> The assumption is that the `data` attribute contains opaque application data that is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `data` attribute SHOULD contain opaque application data that is
```

Author: done, thanks!

encoded as declared by the `datacontenttype` attribute.

> An application is free to hold the information in any in-memory representation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An application MAY hold the information in any in-memory representation
```

Author: done! thanks!

inspecting the [Pub/Sub Attribute `Content-Type`][content-type] of the
[Pub/Sub message][pubsub-message]. If the attribute is present and its value is prefixed 
with the CloudEvents media type `application/cloudevents`, indicating the use of a known

> [event format](#14-event-formats), the receiver is expected to use _structured_ mode,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[event format](#14-event-formats), the receiver SHOULD use _structured_ mode,
```

Author: done

> otherwise it SHOULD default to _binary_ mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
otherwise it MUST default to _binary_ mode.
```

Reviewer 3: My reading of the spec implies this is a MUST, but feel free to make this SHOULD if you disagree.

Author: is a MUST you are right...

Author: done
